Documenting `send_input` and `receive_input` (#11724)
PrefectHQ/prefect: docs/guides/creating-interactive-workflows.md

## Pausing or suspending a flow until it receives input

You can pause or suspend a flow until it receives input from a user in Prefect's UI. This is useful when you need to ask for additional information or feedback before resuming a flow. Such workflows are often called [human-in-the-loop](https://hai.stanford.edu/news/humans-loop-design-interactive-ai-systems) (HITL) systems.

!!! note "What is human-in-the-loop interactivity used for?"

    Approval workflows that pause to ask a human to confirm whether a workflow should continue are very common in the business world. Certain types of [machine learning training](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10462-022-10246-w) and artificial intelligence workflows benefit from incorporating HITL design.

### Waiting for input

To receive input while paused or suspended you must use the `wait_for_input` parameter in the `pause_flow_run` or `suspend_flow_run` functions. This parameter accepts one of the following:

> - A type like `int` or `str`

Author: Yeah, built-in types work as well as things like `List[str]`, but at that point, you probably want a BaseModel or RunInput. I'll add a note.

- A `pydantic.BaseModel` subclass
- A subclass of `prefect.input.RunInput`

The simplest way to pause or suspend and wait for input is to pass a type:

```python
from prefect import flow, pause_flow_run

@flow

> async def greet_user():

Author: Good idea!

    logger = get_run_logger()

    user_input = await pause_flow_run(wait_for_input=str)

    logger.info(f"Hello, {user_input.name}!")
```

In this example, the flow run will pause until a user clicks the Resume button in the Prefect UI, enters a name, and submits the form.

!!! note "What types can you pass for `wait_for_input`?"

>     When you pass a type like `int` as an argument for the `wait_for_input` parameter to `pause_flow_run` or `suspend_flow_run`, Prefect automatically creates a Pydantic model containing one field annotated with the type you specified. This means you can use [any type annotation that Pydantic accepts](https://docs.pydantic.dev/1.10/usage/types/) as a field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When you pass a type such as `int` as an argument for the `wait_for_input` parameter to `pause_flow_run` or `suspend_flow_run`, Prefect automatically creates a Pydantic model containing one field annotated with the type you specified. This means you can use [any type annotation that Pydantic accepts](https://docs.pydantic.dev/1.10/usage/types/) as a field.
```

> Instead of a basic type, you can pass in a `pydantic.BaseModel` class. This is useful if you already have `BaseModels` you want to use:

Author: "Built-in type"

As an additional step, you may want to use an [automation](/concepts/automations) or [notification](/concepts/notifications/) to alert the user to the error.

## Sending and receiving input at runtime

Use the `send_input` and `receive_input` functions to send input to a flow run or receive input from a flow run at runtime. You don't need to pause or suspend the flow run to send or receive input.

!!! note "Why would you send or receive input without pausing or suspending?"

    You might want to send or receive input without pausing or suspending in scenarios where the flow run is designed to handle real-time data. For instance, in a live monitoring system, you might need to update certain parameters based on the incoming data without interrupting the flow. Another use is having a long-running flow that continually responds to runtime input with low latency. For example, if you're building a chatbot, you could have a flow that starts a GPT Assistant and manages a conversation thread.

The most important parameter to the `send_input` and `receive_input` functions is `run_type`, which should one of the following:

> - A type like `int` or `str`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A type such as `int` or `str`
```

- A `pydantic.BaseModel` subclass
- A subclass of `prefect.input.RunInput`

Let's look at some examples! We'll check out `receive_input` first, followed by `send_input`, and then we'll see the two functions working together.

### Receiving input

To get us started, the following flow uses `receive_input` to continually receive names and print a personalized greeting for each name it receives:

```python
from prefect import flow
from prefect.input.run_input import receive_input

@flow
async def greeter_flow():
    async for name_input in receive_input(str, timeout=None):
        print(f"Hello, {name_input}!")  # Prints "Hello, andrew!" if flow received "andrew"
```

> When you pass a type like `str` into `receive_input`, Prefect creates a `RunInput` class to manage your input automatically. When your flow receives input of this type, Prefect uses this `RunInput` class to validate the input, and if validation succeeds, your flow sees the input in the type you specified. So in this example, if the flow received a valid string as input, the variable `name_input` contains the string.

Reviewer: Being pedantic: "like" means "similar to", although it's often used colloquially to mean "such as".

> If, instead, you specify a `BaseModel`, Prefect upgrades your `BaseModel` to a `RunInput` class, and the variable your flow sees -- in this case, `name_input` -- is a `RunInput` instance. Of course, if you pass in a `RunInput` class, no upgrade is needed, and you'll get a `RunInput` instance.

Reviewer: I think you want to make the double dashes Em-dashes. &mdash is the Markdown

> If you prefer to keep things simple and pass types like `str` into `receive_input`, you need access to the generated `RunInput` instance, pass `with_metadata=True` to `receive_input`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you prefer to keep things simple and pass types such as `str` into `receive_input`, you need access to the generated `RunInput` instance. Pass `with_metadata=True` to `receive_input`:
```

    value: str

@flow
async def greeter_flow():
    async for name_input in receive_input(GreeterInput, timeout=None, with_metadata=True):
        print(f"Hello, {name_input.value}!")
```

!!! warning "The type used in `receive_input` and `send_input` must match"
For a flow to receive input, the sender must use the same type that the receiver is receiving. This means that if the receiver is receiving `GreeterInput`, the sender must send `GreeterInput`. If the receiver is receiving `GreeterInput` and the sender sends `str` input that Prefect automatically upgrades to a `RunInput` class, the types won't match, so the receiving flow run won't receive the input.

### Keeping track of inputs you've already seen

By default, each time you call `receive_input`, you get an iterator that iterates over all known inputs, starting with the first received. There are common situations in which you'll want to keep track of inputs you've already seen and avoid seeing them again when you call `receive_input`, such as:

1. The flow receiving input is designed to suspend and resume later
2. The flow receiving input calls `receive_input` in a loop (we'll see an example of this later in this guide)

> The first case requires saving the list of seen inputs somewhere that a future flow run can see them, e.g. a `JSONBlock` scoped to a workspace or other external storage. The second case is easier: you can use a `set` within your flow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first case requires saving the list of seen inputs somewhere that a future flow run can see them, such as a JSON block scoped to a workspace or other external storage. The second case is easier: you can use a `set` within your flow:
```

Reviewer: A link to the Block concept docs might be good here.

```python
from prefect import flow
from prefect.input.run_input import receive_input

@flow
async def greeter():
    # In this case, there is no reason to save inputs, so this just shows
    # how it works. Later in this guide, you will see an example where we
    # really do need to save the seen inputs!
    seen_names = set()

    async for name_input in receive_input(
        str, with_metadata=True, poll_interval=0.1, timeout=None, exclude_keys=seen_names
    ):
        await name_input.respond(f"Hello, {name_input.value}!")
        seen_names.add(name_input.metadata.key)
```

!!! note "Run inputs have keys, not IDs"
    Prefect stores run inputs in key-value storage, so the easiest way to keep track of inputs your flow run has seen is by saving the *key* of each run input. The key for a run input is stored in the `metadata.key` field on a `RunInput` instance.

> Keeping track of seen input keys

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Keeping track of seen input keys
```

Reviewer: I think this is intended to be a subheading?

Next, we'll create a `sender` flow that starts a `greeter` flow run and then enters a loop, continuously getting input from the terminal and sending it to the greeter flow:

```python
@flow
async def sender():
    greeter_flow_run = await run_deployment(
        "greeter/send-receive", timeout=0, as_subflow=False
    )

    greetings_seen = set()

    while True:
        name = input("What is your name? ")
        if not name:
            continue

        if name == "q" or name == "quit":
            await send_input(EXIT_SIGNAL, flow_run_id=greeter_flow_run.id)
            print("Goodbye!")
            break

        await send_input(name, flow_run_id=greeter_flow_run.id)

        async for greeting in receive_input(
            str, with_metadata=True, exclude_keys=greetings_seen, timeout=None, poll_interval=0.1
        ):
            print(greeting)
            greetings_seen.add(greeting.metadata.key)
            break
```

There's more going on here than in `greeter`, so let's take a closer look at the pieces.

> First, we use `run_deployment` to start a `greeter` flow run. This means we must have a worker or `flow.serve()` running in separate process. That process will begin running `greeter` while `sender` continues to execute. Calling `run_deployment(..., timeout=0)` ensures that `sender` won't wait for the `greeter` flow run to complete, because, of course, it's running a loop and will only exit when we send `EXIT_SIGNAL`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we use `run_deployment` to start a `greeter` flow run. This means we must have a worker or `flow.serve()` running in separate process. That process will begin running `greeter` while `sender` continues to execute. Calling `run_deployment(..., timeout=0)` ensures that `sender` won't wait for the `greeter` flow run to complete, because it's running a loop and will only exit when we send `EXIT_SIGNAL`.
```

Next, what's going on with `greetings_seen`? This flow works by entering a loop, and on each iteration of the loop, the flow asks for terminal input, sends that to the `greeter` flow, and then runs *another loop* when it calls `async for greeting in receive_input(...)`. As we saw earlier in this guide, `receive_input` always starts at the beginning of all input this flow run received. Keeping track of the inputs we've already seen in the `greetings_seen` set allows us to pass this set in for the `exclude_keys` parameter each time we reenter the loop and call `receive_input` again.

> Next, we let the terminal user who ran this flow exit by entering the string "q" or "quit," and when that happens, we also seend the `greeter` flow an exit signal so it will shut down too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we let the terminal user who ran this flow exit by entering the string `q` or `quit`. When that happens, we send the `greeter` flow an exit signal so it will shut down too.
```

> Net, we send the new name to `greeter`. We know that `greeter` is going to send back a greeting as a string, so we immediately begin waiting for new string input. When we receive the greeting, we print it, note the key as one we've seen, and break out of the `async for greeting in receive_inpu(...)` loop to continue the loop that gets terminal input.

Author: Need to show the pieces together in the same file at the end.
